<!--
 Copyright 2025 Paul Guyot <pguyot@kallisys.net>

 SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 OR LGPL-2.1-or-later
-->

# Differences between AtomVM and BEAM

BEAM users may be surprised by limitations or differences between AtomVM and BEAM, whether they
write Erlang, Elixir or Gleam code.

This document describes the current well known differences.

## Principles

AtomVM is designed to be compatible with the BEAM as long as it makes sense on microcontrollers or
environments such as Web Assembly.

One should distinguish features of the VM itself from features of the standard library. AtomVM
team will never reimplement the full OTP standard library, as this full library is too large for
small embedded devices. Still, most modules of the OTP standard library can be executed by AtomVM.
Typically, it is possible to run an Elixir or an
[Erlang REPL](https://github.com/pguyot/atomvm_shell) with the appropriate OTP and Elixir standard
library modules.

AtomVM tests (of the VM as well as the standard library) are typically executed with BEAM to
ensure compatibility beyond BEAM documented features. The Continuous Integration environment runs
these tests with a wide range of BEAM versions.

## Determining if code is run by AtomVM or BEAM

One can use `erlang:system_info(machine)` to find out if the code is executed by AtomVM or BEAM.

BEAM returns `"BEAM"` while AtomVM returns `"ATOM"`.

## Known limitations of the VM

AtomVM does not implement some key features of the BEAM. Some of these limitations are being
worked on and this list might be outdated. Do not hesitate to check GitHub issues or contact us
when in doubt.

### Wide precision integers

AtomVM currently only supports 64 bits integers. This is being worked on. However, please note
that AtomVM is unlikely to support arbitrary precision integers as libraries for such support
usually are quite large.

### Bit syntax

AtomVM supports binaries, binary construction and binary pattern matching. Bit syntax (i.e. with
sizes not a multiple of 8) is only supported as long as they would not generate bitstrings, i.e.
binaries with a number if bits that are not multiple of 8.

The following is supported:

    <<X:3, Y:5>> = <<N>>

The following is not:

    <<X:3>>

### Code reloading

AtomVM does not support code reloading yet. Few items are prioritized before this feature but it
is part of the roadmap.

### Distribution

AtomVM support for distribution is a work in progress. Many operations are supported but some key
features such as node monitoring are not implemented yet.

It is currently possible to connect a BEAM node with an AtomVM node.

## Known limitations of the standard library

AtomVM standard library is extremely limited and while programs written for AtomVM can be run
using OTP standard library if they do not call microcontroller-specific APIs, the opposite is not
true. A program written for Erlang/OTP is very unlikely runnable on AtomVM without a lot of
changes.

Please check AtomVM's [standard library documentation](./apidocs/erlang/estdlib/README.md) to find out differences
and limitations of each module.

See also [stubbed functions](./stubbed-functions.md) list.

### OTP architecture

Support for OTP applications is currently very limited. `gen_server`, `gen_statem` and `supervisor`
are partially supported, but `proc_lib` is not.

## Memory usage and speed

AtomVM is optimized for memory usage and is much slower than BEAM, even with JIT compiler enabled.

However, AtomVM uses much less RAM. Process heap initial size and process heap growth strategy are
much more agressive on AtomVM, and garbage collector runs much more frequently. If speed matters,
it is possible to use a process heap growth strategy inspired by BEAM's with an appropriate option
passed to `spawn_opt`.

    spawn_opt(
        fun() -> ... end,
        [{atomvm_heap_growth, fibonacci}]
    )

## Other differences

### NIFs and Ports

AtomVM supports NIFs and Ports with an API similar but different from BEAM's. However NIFs
and Ports need to be linked with the VM as most embedded environments do not support dynamic
linking.

AtomVM does not implement the onload opcode and therefore the -onload attribute, which is mostly
used for NIFs support on BEAM.

AtomVM doesn't have any dirty scheduler for dirty NIFs and NIFs should return quickly to avoid
locking the VM.

Ports are also executed by the schedulers and should return quickly.

### Resources

AtomVM supports resources but for historical reasons these appear as zero-length binaries as they
used to with OTP21, and not as references as they currently do with recent versions of the BEAM.
This has some consequences on matching.

### BEAM file compatibility

AtomVM can run BEAM files generated by `erlc` compiler from OTP21 to the latest master version,
while BEAM cannot and often requires to recompile.

### Stacktraces and exceptions

Stacktraces and exception error messages on AtomVM are not as detailed as on BEAM. There is no `error_info` in AtomVM exceptions.
For example a `function_clause` error will not include the arguments that did not match any clause.

Additionally, some error tags can differ. For example, calling an unserialized function (using `binary_to_term/1`)
from a module that exists in another version may error `badfun` with BEAM and will error `undef` with AtomVM.
